<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of 35 Sonnets by Fernando Pessoa



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: 35 Sonnets

Author: Fernando Pessoa

Release Date: November 30, 2006 [Ebook #19978]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
 <fileDesc>
 <titleStmt>
 <title>35 Sonnets</title>
 <author>Fernando Pessoa</author>
 </titleStmt>
 <editionStmt>
  <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
 </editionStmt>
 <publicationStmt>
 <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
 <date value="2006-11-30">November 30, 2006</date>
 <idno type="etext-no">19978</idno>
 <availability>
 <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
 with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
 away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
 License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
 </availability>
 </publicationStmt>

 <sourceDesc>
  <bibl>
  <title>35 Sonnets</title>
  <author>Fernando Pessoa</author>
  <imprint>
   <pubPlace>Lisbon</pubPlace>
   <publisher>Monteiro &amp; Co.</publisher>
   <date>1918</date>
  </imprint>
  </bibl>
 </sourceDesc>
 </fileDesc>

 <encodingDesc>
 <classDecl>
  <taxonomy id="lc">
  <bibl>
   <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
  </bibl>
  </taxonomy>
 </classDecl>
 </encodingDesc>
 <profileDesc>
 <langUsage>
  <language id="en">English</language>
 </langUsage>
 <textClass>
  <classCode scheme="lc">
  *** <!-- LoC Class (PR, PQ, ...) -->
  </classCode>
  <keywords>
  <list>
   <!-- <item></item> any keywords for PG search engine -->
  </list>
  </keywords>
 </textClass>
 </profileDesc>
 <revisionDesc>
 <change>
  <date value="2006-11-30">November 30, 2006</date>
  <respStmt>
  <name>Rita Farinha<lb /></name>
  <name>Joshua Hutchinson<lb /></name>
  <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
  <name>This file was produced from images generously made available by National Library of Portugal (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal).</name>
  </respStmt>
  <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
 </change>
 </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htbp' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w20             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w20             { width: 20% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text>
<front>
<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="titlepage" />
</div>

</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>I.</head>

<lg>
<l>Whether we write or speak or do but look</l>
<l>We are ever unapparent. What we are</l>
<l>Cannot be transfused into word or book.</l>
<l>Our soul from us is infinitely far.</l>
<l>However much we give our thoughts the will</l>
<l>To be our soul and gesture it abroad,</l>
<l>Our hearts are incommunicable still.</l>
<l>In what we show ourselves we are ignored.</l>
<l>The abyss from soul to soul cannot be bridged</l>
<l>By any skill of thought or trick of seeming.</l>
<l>Unto our very selves we are abridged</l>
<l>When we would utter to our thought our being.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">We are our dreams of ourselves, souls by gleams,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And each to each other dreams of others' dreams.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>II.</head>

<lg>
<l>If that apparent part of life's delight</l>
<l>Our tingled flesh-sense circumscribes were seen</l>
<l>By aught save reflex and co-carnal sight,</l>
<l>Joy, flesh and life might prove but a gross screen.</l>
<l>Haply Truth's body is no eyable being,</l>
<l>Appearance even as appearance lies,</l>
<l>Haply our close, dark, vague, warm sense of seeing</l>
<l>Is the choked vision of blindfolded eyes.</l>
<l>Wherefrom what comes to thought's sense of life? Nought.</l>
<l>All is either the irrational world we see</l>
<l>Or some aught-else whose being-unknown doth rot</l>
<l>Its use for our thought's use. Whence taketh me</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">A qualm-like ache of life, a body-deep</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Soul-hate of what we seek and what we weep.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="002" /><anchor id="Pg002" />

<div>
<head>III.</head>

<lg>
<l>When I do think my meanest line shall be</l>
<l>More in Time's use than my creating whole,</l>
<l>That future eyes more clearly shall feel me</l>
<l>In this inked page than in my direct soul;</l>
<l>When I conjecture put to make me seeing</l>
<l>Good readers of me in some aftertime,</l>
<l>Thankful to some idea of my being</l>
<l>That doth not even my with gone true soul rime;</l>
<l>An anger at the essence of the world,</l>
<l>That makes this thus, or thinkable this wise,</l>
<l>Takes my soul by the throat and makes it hurled</l>
<l>In nightly horrors of despaired surmise,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And I become the mere sense of a rage</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">That lacks the very words whose waste might 'suage.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>IV.</head>

<lg>
<l>I could not think of thee as piecèd rot,</l>
<l>Yet such thou wert, for thou hadst been long dead;</l>
<l>Yet thou liv'dst entire in my seeing thought</l>
<l>And what thou wert in me had never fled.</l>
<l>Nay, I had fixed the moments of thy beauty--</l>
<l>Thy ebbing smile, thy kiss's readiness,</l>
<l>And memory had taught my heart the duty</l>
<l>To know thee ever at that deathlessness.</l>
<l>But when I came where thou wert laid, and saw</l>
<l>The natural flowers ignoring thee sans blame,</l>
<l>And the encroaching grass, with casual flaw,</l>
<l>Framing the stone to age where was thy name,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">I knew not how to feel, nor what to be</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Towards thy fate's material secrecy.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="003" /><anchor id="Pg003" />

<div>
<head>V.</head>

<lg>
<l>How can I think, or edge my thoughts to action,</l>
<l>When the miserly press of each day's need</l>
<l>Aches to a narrowness of spilled distraction</l>
<l>My soul appalled at the world's work's time-greed?</l>
<l>How can I pause my thoughts upon the task</l>
<l>My soul was born to think that it must do</l>
<l>When every moment has a thought to ask</l>
<l>To fit the immediate craving of its cue?</l>
<l>The coin I'd heap for marrying my Muse</l>
<l>And build our home i'th' greater Time-to-be</l>
<l>Becomes dissolved by needs of each day's use</l>
<l>And I feel beggared of infinity,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Like a true-Christian sinner, each day flesh-driven</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">By his own act to forfeit his wished heaven.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>VI.</head>

<lg>
<l>As a bad orator, badly o'er-book-skilled,</l>
<l>Doth overflow his purpose with made heat,</l>
<l>And, like a clock, winds with withoutness willed</l>
<l>What should have been an inner instinct's feat;</l>
<l>Or as a prose-wit, harshly poet turned,</l>
<l>Lacking the subtler music in his measure,</l>
<l>With useless care labours but to be spurned,</l>
<l>Courting in alien speech the Muse's pleasure;</l>
<l>I study how to love or how to hate,</l>
<l>Estranged by consciousness from sentiment,</l>
<l>With a thought feeling forced to be sedate</l>
<l>Even when the feeling's nature is violent;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">As who would learn to swim without the river,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">When nearest to the trick, as far as ever.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="004" /><anchor id="Pg004" />

<div>
<head>VII.</head>

<lg>
<l>Thy words are torture to me, that scarce grieve thee--</l>
<l>That entire death shall null my entire thought;</l>
<l>And I feel torture, not that I believe thee,</l>
<l>But that I cannot disbelieve thee not.</l>
<l>Shall that of me that now contains the stars</l>
<l>Be by the very contained stars survived?</l>
<l>Thus were Fate all unjust. Yet what truth bars</l>
<l>An all unjust Fate's truth from being believed?</l>
<l>Conjecture cannot fit to the seen world</l>
<l>A garment of its thought untorn or covering,</l>
<l>Or with its stuffed garb forge an otherworld</l>
<l>Without itself its dead deceit discovering;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">So, all being possible, an idle thought may</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Less idle thoughts, self-known no truer, dismay.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>VIII.</head>

<lg>
<l>How many masks wear we, and undermasks,</l>
<l>Upon our countenance of soul, and when,</l>
<l>If for self-sport the soul itself unmasks,</l>
<l>Knows it the last mask off and the face plain?</l>
<l>The true mask feels no inside to the mask</l>
<l>But looks out of the mask by co-masked eyes.</l>
<l>Whatever consciousness begins the task</l>
<l>The task's accepted use to sleepness ties.</l>
<l>Like a child frighted by its mirrored faces,</l>
<l>Our souls, that children are, being thought-losing,</l>
<l>Foist otherness upon their seen grimaces</l>
<l>And get a whole world on their forgot causing;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And, when a thought would unmask our soul's masking,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Itself goes not unmasked to the unmasking.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="005" /><anchor id="Pg005" />

<div>
<head>IX.</head>

<lg>
<l>Oh to be idle loving idleness!</l>
<l>But I am idle all in hate of me;</l>
<l>Ever in action's dream, in the false stress</l>
<l>Of purposed action never set to be.</l>
<l>Like a fierce beast self-penned in a bait-lair,</l>
<l>My will to act binds with excess my action,</l>
<l>Not-acting coils the thought with raged despair,</l>
<l>And acting rage doth paint despair distraction.</l>
<l>Like someone sinking in a treacherous sand,</l>
<l>Each gesture to deliver sinks the more;</l>
<l>The struggle avails not, and to raise no hand,</l>
<l>Though but more slowly useless, we've no power.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Hence live I the dead life each day doth bring,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Repurposed for next day's repurposing.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>X.</head>

<lg>
<l>As to a child, I talked my heart asleep</l>
<l>With empty promise of the coming day,</l>
<l>And it slept rather for my words made sleep</l>
<l>Than from a thought of what their sense did say.</l>
<l>For did it care for sense, would it not wake</l>
<l>And question closer to the morrow's pleasure?</l>
<l>Would it not edge nearer my words, to take</l>
<l>The promise in the meting of its measure?</l>
<l>So, if it slept, 'twas that it cared but for</l>
<l>The present sleepy use of promised joy,</l>
<l>Thanking the fruit but for the forecome flower</l>
<l>Which the less active senses best enjoy.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Thus with deceit do I detain the heart</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Of which deceit's self knows itself a part.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="006" /><anchor id="Pg006" />

<div>
<head>XI.</head>

<lg>
<l>Like to a ship that storms urge on its course,</l>
<l>By its own trials our soul is surer made.</l>
<l>The very things that make the voyage worse</l>
<l>Do make it better; its peril is its aid.</l>
<l>And, as the storm drives from the storm, our heart</l>
<l>Within the peril disimperilled grows;</l>
<l>A port is near the more from port we part--</l>
<l>The port whereto our driven direction goes.</l>
<l>If we reap knowledge to cross-profit, this</l>
<l>From storms we learn, when the storm's height doth drive--</l>
<l>That the black presence of its violence is</l>
<l>The pushing promise of near far blue skies.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Learn we but how to have the pilot-skill,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And the storm's very might shall mate our will.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XII.</head>

<lg>
<l>As the lone, frighted user of a night-road</l>
<l>Suddenly turns round, nothing to detect,</l>
<l>Yet on his fear's sense keepeth still the load</l>
<l>Of that brink-nothing he doth but suspect;</l>
<l>And the cold terror moves to him more near</l>
<l>Of something that from nothing casts a spell,</l>
<l>That, when he moves, to fright more is not there,</l>
<l>And's only visible when invisible</l>
<l>So I upon the world turn round in thought,</l>
<l>And nothing viewing do no courage take,</l>
<l>But my more terror, from no seen cause got,</l>
<l>To that felt corporate emptiness forsake,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And draw my sense of mystery's horror from</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Seeing no mystery's mystery alone.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="007" /><anchor id="Pg007" />

<div>
<head>XIII.</head>

<lg>
<l>When I should be asleep to mine own voice</l>
<l>In telling thee how much thy love's my dream,</l>
<l>I find me listening to myself, the noise</l>
<l>Of my words othered in my hearing them.</l>
<l>Yet wonder not: this is the poet's soul.</l>
<l>I could not tell thee well of how I love,</l>
<l>Loved I not less by knowing it, were all</l>
<l>My self my love and no thought love to prove.</l>
<l>What consciousness makes more by consciousness,</l>
<l>It makes less, for it makes it less itself,</l>
<l>My sense of love could not my love rich-dress</l>
<l>Did it not for it spend love's own love-pelf.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Poet's love's this (as in these words I prove thee):</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">I love my love for thee more than I love thee.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XIV.</head>

<lg>
<l>We are born at sunset and we die ere morn,</l>
<l>And the whole darkness of the world we know,</l>
<l>How can we guess its truth, to darkness born,</l>
<l>The obscure consequence of absent glow?</l>
<l>Only the stars do teach us light. We grasp</l>
<l>Their scattered smallnesses with thoughts that stray,</l>
<l>And, though their eyes look through night's complete mask,</l>
<l>Yet they speak not the features of the day.</l>
<l>Why should these small denials of the whole</l>
<l>More than the black whole the pleased eyes attract?</l>
<l>Why what it calls «worth» does the captive soul</l>
<l>Add to the small and from the large detract?</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">So, put of light's love wishing it night's stretch,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">A nightly thought of day we darkly reach.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="008" /><anchor id="Pg008" />

<div>
<head>XV.</head>

<lg>
<l>Like a bad suitor desperate and trembling</l>
<l>From the mixed sense of being not loved and loving,</l>
<l>Who with feared longing half would know, dissembling</l>
<l>With what he'd wish proved what he fears soon proving,</l>
<l>I look with inner eyes afraid to look,</l>
<l>Yet perplexed into looking, at the worth</l>
<l>This verse may have and wonder, of my book,</l>
<l>To what thoughts shall't in alien hearts give birth.</l>
<l>But, as he who doth love, and, loving, hopes,</l>
<l>Yet, hoping, fears, fears to put proof to proof,</l>
<l>And in his mind for possible proofs gropes,</l>
<l>Delaying the true proof, lest the real thing scoff,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">I daily live, i'th' fame I dream to see,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">But by my thought of others' thought of me.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XVI.</head>

<lg>
<l>We never joy enjoy to that full point</l>
<l>Regret doth wish joy had enjoyèd been,</l>
<l>Nor have the strength regret to disappoint</l>
<l>Recalling not past joy's thought, but its mien.</l>
<l>Yet joy was joy when it enjoyèd was</l>
<l>And after-enjoyed when as joy recalled,</l>
<l>It must have been joy ere its joy did pass</l>
<l>And, recalled, joy still, since its being-past galled.</l>
<l>Alas! All this is useless, for joy's in</l>
<l>Enjoying, not in thinking of enjoying.</l>
<l>Its mere thought-mirroring gainst itself doth sin,</l>
<l>By mere reflecting solid life destroying,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Yet the more thought we take to thought to prove</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">It must not think, doth further from joy move.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="009" /><anchor id="Pg009" />

<div>
<head>XVII.</head>

<lg>
<l>My love, and not I, is the egoist.</l>
<l>My love for thee loves itself more than thee;</l>
<l>Ay, more than me, in whom it doth exist,</l>
<l>And makes me live that it may feed on me.</l>
<l>In the country of bridges the bridge is</l>
<l>More real than the shores it doth unsever;</l>
<l>So in our world, all of Relation, this</l>
<l>Is true--that truer is Love than either lover.</l>
<l>This thought therefore comes lightly to Doubt's door--</l>
<l>If we, seeing substance of this world, are not</l>
<l>Mere Intervals, God's Absence and no more,</l>
<l>Hollows in real Consciousness and Thought.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And if 'tis possible to Thought to bear this fruit,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Why should it not be possible to Truth?</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XVIII.</head>

<lg>
<l>Indefinite space, which, by co-substance night,</l>
<l>In one black mystery two void mysteries blends;</l>
<l>The stray stars, whose innumerable light</l>
<l>Repeats one mystery till conjecture ends;</l>
<l>The stream of time, known by birth-bursting bubbles;</l>
<l>The gulf of silence, empty even of nought;</l>
<l>Thought's high-walled maze, which the outed owner troubles</l>
<l>Because the string's lost and the plan forgot:</l>
<l>When I think on this and that here I stand,</l>
<l>The thinker of these thoughts, emptily wise,</l>
<l>Holding up to my thinking my thing-hand</l>
<l>And looking at it with thought-alien eyes,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">The prayer of my wonder looketh past</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">The universal darkness lone and vast.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="010" /><anchor id="Pg010" />

<div>
<head>XIX.</head>

<lg>
<l>Beauty and love let no one separate,</l>
<l>Whom exact Nature did to each other fit,</l>
<l>Giving to Beauty love as finishing fate</l>
<l>And to Love beauty as true colour of it.</l>
<l>Let he but friend be who the soul finds fair,</l>
<l>But let none love outside the body's thought,</l>
<l>So the seen couple's togetherness shall bear</l>
<l>Truth to the beauty each in the other sought.</l>
<l>I could but love thee out of mockery</l>
<l>Of love and thee and mine own ugliness;</l>
<l>Therefore thy beauty I sing and wish not thee,</l>
<l>Thanking the Gods I long not out of place,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Lest, like a slave that for kings' robes doth long,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Obtained, shall with mere wearing do them wrong.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XX.</head>

<lg>
<l>When in the widening circle of rebirth</l>
<l>To a new flesh my travelled soul shall come,</l>
<l>And try again the unremembered earth</l>
<l>With the old sadness for the immortal home,</l>
<l>Shall I revisit these same differing fields</l>
<l>And cull the old new flowers with the same sense,</l>
<l>That some small breath of foiled remembrance yields,</l>
<l>Of more age than my days in this pretence?</l>
<l>Shall I again regret strange faces lost</l>
<l>Of which the present memory is forgot</l>
<l>And but in unseen bulks of vagueness tossed</l>
<l>Out of the closed sea and black night of Thought?</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Were thy face one, what sweetness will't not be,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Though by blind feeling, to remember thee!</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="011" /><anchor id="Pg011" />

<div>
<head>XXI.</head>

<lg>
<l>Thought was born blind, but Thought knows what is seeing.</l>
<l>Its careful touch, deciphering forms from shapes,</l>
<l>Still suggests form as aught whose proper being</l>
<l>Mere finding touch with erring darkness drapes.</l>
<l>Yet whence, except from guessed sight, does touch teach</l>
<l>That touch is but a close and empty sense?</l>
<l>How does mere touch, self-uncontented, reach</l>
<l>For some truer sense's whole intelligence?</l>
<l>The thing once touched, if touch be now omitted,</l>
<l>Stands yet in memory real and outward known,</l>
<l>So the untouching memory of touch is fitted</l>
<l>With sense of a sense whereby far things are shown</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">So, by touch of untouching, wrongly aright,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Touch' thought of seeing sees not things but Sight.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XXII.</head>

<lg>
<l>My soul is a stiff pageant, man by man,</l>
<l>Of some Egyptian art than Egypt older,</l>
<l>Found in some tomb whose rite no guess can scan,</l>
<l>Where all things else to coloured dust did moulder.</l>
<l>Whate'er its sense may mean, its age is twin</l>
<l>To that of priesthoods whose feet stood near God,</l>
<l>When knowledge was so great that 'twas a sin</l>
<l>And man's mere soul too man for its abode.</l>
<l>But when I ask what means that pageant I</l>
<l>And would look at it suddenly, I lose</l>
<l>The sense I had of seeing it, nor can try</l>
<l>Again to look, nor hath my memory a use</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">That seems recalling, save that it recalls</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">An emptiness of having seen those walls.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="012" /><anchor id="Pg012" />

<div>
<head>XXIII.</head>

<lg>
<l>Even as upon a low and cloud-domed day,</l>
<l>When clouds are one cloud till the horizon,</l>
<l>Our thinking senses deem the sun away</l>
<l>And say «'tis sunless» and «there is no sun»;</l>
<l>And yet the very day they wrong truth by</l>
<l>Is of the unseen sun's effluent essence,</l>
<l>The very words do give themselves the lie,</l>
<l>The very thought of absence comes from presence:</l>
<l>Even so deem we through Good of what is evil.</l>
<l>He speaks of light that speaks of absent light,</l>
<l>And absent god, becoming present devil,</l>
<l>Is still the absent god by essence' right.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">The withdrawn cause by being withdrawn doth get</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">(Being thereby cause still) the denied effect.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XXIV.</head>

<lg>
<l>Something in me was born before the stars</l>
<l>And saw the sun begin from far away.</l>
<l>Our yellow, local day on its wont jars,</l>
<l>For it hath communed with an absolute day.</l>
<l>Through my Thought's night, as a worn robe's heard trail</l>
<l>That I have never seen, I drag this past</l>
<l>That saw the Possible like a dawn grow pale</l>
<l>On the lost night before it, mute and vast.</l>
<l>It dates remoter than God's birth can reach,</l>
<l>That had no birth but the world's coming after.</l>
<l>So the world's to me as, after whispered speech,</l>
<l>The cause-ignored sudden echoing of laughter.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">That 't has a meaning my conjecture knows,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">But that 't has meaning's all its meaning shows.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="013" /><anchor id="Pg013" />

<div>
<head>XXV.</head>

<lg>
<l>We are in Fate and Fate's and do but lack</l>
<l>Outness from soul to know ourselves its dwelling,</l>
<l>And do but compel Fate aside or back</l>
<l>By Fate's own immanence in the compelling.</l>
<l>We are too far in us from outward truth</l>
<l>To know how much we are not what we are,</l>
<l>And live but in the heat of error's youth,</l>
<l>Yet young enough its acting youth to ignore.</l>
<l>The doubleness of mind fails us, to glance</l>
<l>At our exterior presence amid things,</l>
<l>Sizing from otherness our countenance</l>
<l>And seeing our puppet will's act-acting strings.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">An unknown language speaks in us, which we</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Are at the words of, fronted from reality.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<div>
<head>XXVI.</head>

<lg>
<l>The world is woven all of dream and error</l>
<l>And but one sureness in our truth may lie--</l>
<l>That when we hold to aught our thinking's mirror</l>
<l>We know it not by knowing it thereby.</l>
<l>For but one side of things the mirror knows,</l>
<l>And knows it colded from its solidness.</l>
<l>A double lie its truth is; what it shows</l>
<l>By true show's false and nowhere by true place.</l>
<l>Thought clouds our life's day-sense with strangeness, yet</l>
<l>Never from strangeness more than that it's strange</l>
<l>Doth buy our perplexed thinking, for we get</l>
<l>But the words' sense from words--knowledge, truth, change.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">We know the world is false, not what is true.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Yet we think on, knowing we ne'er shall know.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="014" /><anchor id="Pg014" />

<div>
<head>XXVII.</head>

<lg>
<l>How yesterday is long ago! The past</l>
<l>Is a fixed infinite distance from to-day,</l>
<l>And bygone things, the first-lived as the last,</l>
<l>In irreparable sameness far away.</l>
<l>How the to-be is infinitely ever</l>
<l>Out of the place wherein it will be Now,</l>
<l>Like the seen wave yet far up in the river,</l>
<l>Which reaches not us, but the new-waved flow!</l>
<l>This thing Time is, whose being is having none,</l>
<l>The equable tyrant of our different fates,</l>
<l>Who could not be bought off by a shattered sun</l>
<l>Or tricked by new use of our careful dates.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">This thing Time is, that to the grave-will bear</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">My heart, sure but of it and of my fear.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XXVIII.</head>

<lg>
<l>The edge of the green wave whitely doth hiss</l>
<l>Upon the wetted sand. I look, yet dream.</l>
<l>Surely reality cannot be this!</l>
<l>Somehow, somewhere this surely doth but seem!</l>
<l>The sky, the sea, this great extent disclosed</l>
<l>Of outward joy, this bulk of life we feel,</l>
<l>Is not something, but something interposed.</l>
<l>Only what in this is not this is real.</l>
<l>If this be to have sense, if to be awake</l>
<l>Be but to see this bright, great sleep of things,</l>
<l>For the rarer potion mine own dreams I'll take</l>
<l>And for truth commune with imaginings,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Holding a dream too bitter, a too fair curse,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">This common sleep of men, the universe.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="015" /><anchor id="Pg015" />

<div>
<head>XXIX.</head>

<lg>
<l>My weary life, that lives unsatisfied</l>
<l>On the foiled off-brink of being e'er but this,</l>
<l>To whom the power to will hath been denied</l>
<l>And the will to renounce doth also miss;</l>
<l>My sated life, with having nothing sated,</l>
<l>In the motion of moving poisèd aye,</l>
<l>Within its dreams from its own dreams abated--</l>
<l>This life let the Gods change or take away.</l>
<l>For this endless succession of empty hours,</l>
<l>Like deserts after deserts, voidly one,</l>
<l>Doth undermine the very dreaming powers</l>
<l>And dull even thought's active inaction,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Tainting with fore-unwilled will the dreamed act</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Twice thus removed from the unobtained fact.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XXX.</head>

<lg>
<l>I do not know what truth the false untruth</l>
<l>Of this sad sense of the seen world may own,</l>
<l>Or if this flowered plant bears also a fruit</l>
<l>Unto the true reality unknown.</l>
<l>But as the rainbow, neither earth's nor sky's,</l>
<l>Stands in the dripping freshness of lulled rain,</l>
<l>A hope, not real yet not fancy's, lies</l>
<l>Athwart the moment of our ceasing pain.</l>
<l>Somehow, since pain is felt yet felt as ill,</l>
<l>Hope hath a better warrant than being hoped;</l>
<l>Since pain is felt as aught we should not feel</l>
<l>Man hath a Nature's reason for having groped,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Since Time was Time and age and grief his measures,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Towards a better shelter than Time's pleasures.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="016" /><anchor id="Pg016" />

<div>
<head>XXXI.</head>

<lg>
<l>I am older than Nature and her Time</l>
<l>By all the timeless age of Consciousness,</l>
<l>And my adult oblivion of the clime</l>
<l>Where I was born makes me not countryless.</l>
<l>Ay, and dim through my daylight thoughts escape</l>
<l>Yearnings for that land where my childhood dreamed,</l>
<l>Which I cannot recall in colour or shape</l>
<l>But haunts my hours like something that hath gleamed</l>
<l>And yet is not as light remembered,</l>
<l>Nor to the left or to the right conceived;</l>
<l>And all round me tastes as if life were dead</l>
<l>And the world made but to be disbelieved.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Thus I my hope on unknown truth lay; yet</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">How but by hope do I the unknown truth get?</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XXXII.</head>

<lg>
<l>When I have sense of what to sense appears,</l>
<l>Sense is sense ere 'tis mine or mine in me is.</l>
<l>When I hear, Hearing, ere I do hear, hears.</l>
<l>When I see, before me abstract Seeing sees.</l>
<l>I am part Soul part I in all I touch--</l>
<l>Soul by that part I hold in common with all,</l>
<l>And I the spoiled part, that doth make sense such</l>
<l>As I can err by it and my sense mine call.</l>
<l>The rest is wondering what these thoughts may mean,</l>
<l>That come to explain and suddenly are gone,</l>
<l>Like messengers that mock the message' mien,</l>
<l>Explaining all but the explanation;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">As if we a ciphered letter's cipher hit</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And find it in an unknown language writ.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="017" /><anchor id="Pg017" />

<div>
<head>XXXIII.</head>

<lg>
<l>He that goes back does, since he goes, advance,</l>
<l>Though he doth not advance who goeth back,</l>
<l>And he that seeks, though he on nothing chance,</l>
<l>May still by words be said to find a lack.</l>
<l>This paradox of having, that is nought</l>
<l>In the world's meaning of the things it screens,</l>
<l>Is yet true of the substance of pure thought</l>
<l>And there means something by the nought it means.</l>
<l>For thinking nought does on nought being confer,</l>
<l>As giving not is acting not to give,</l>
<l>And, to the same unbribed true thought, to err</l>
<l>Is to find truth, though by its negative.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">So why call this world false, if false to be</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Be to be aught, and being aught Being to be?</l>
</lg>
</div>

<div>
<head>XXXIV.</head>

<lg>
<l>Happy the maimed, the halt, the mad, the blind--</l>
<l>All who, stamped separate by curtailing birth,</l>
<l>Owe no duty's allegiance to mankind</l>
<l>Nor stand a valuing in their scheme of worth!</l>
<l>But I, whom Fate, not Nature, did curtail,</l>
<l>By no exterior voidness being exempt,</l>
<l>Must bear accusing glances where I fail,</l>
<l>Fixed in the general orbit of contempt.</l>
<l>Fate, less than Nature in being kind to lacking,</l>
<l>Giving the ill, shows not as outer cause,</l>
<l>Making our mock-free will the mirror's backing</l>
<l>Which Fate's own acts as if in itself shows;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">And men, like children, seeing the image there,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Take place for cause and make our will Fate bear.</l>
</lg>
</div>

<pb n="018" /><anchor id="Pg018" />

<div>
<head>XXXV.</head>

<lg>
<l>Good. I have done. My heart weighs. I am sad.</l>
<l>The outer day, void statue of lit blue,</l>
<l>Is altogether outward, other, glad</l>
<l>At mere being not-I (so my aches construe).</l>
<l>I, that have failed in everything, bewail</l>
<l>Nothing this hour but that I have bewailed,</l>
<l>For in the general fate what is't to fail?</l>
<l>Why, fate being past for Fate, 'tis but to have failed.</l>
<l>Whatever hap-or stop, what matters it,</l>
<l>Sith to the mattering our will bringeth nought?</l>
<l>With the higher trifling let us world our wit,</l>
<l>Conscious that, if we do't, that was the lot</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">The regular stars bound us to, when they stood</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Godfathers to our birth and to our blood.</l>
</lg>
</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
<div>
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>

</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19978-tei.txt or 19978-tei.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/9/7/19978/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
